readme.md, before:

# Thumos
it does some serious shit
 - [`configuration`](#configuration)
   - [`views`](#creating-views)
   - [`models`](#creating-models)
   - [`set`](#creating-sets)
   - [`access`](#access-modules)
   - [`queries`](#queries)
   - [`authentication`](#authentication)
 - [`api`](#api)
   - [`views`](#view-api)
   - [`models`](#model-api)
   - [`sets`](#set-api)
 - [`loaders`](#included-loaders)
   - [`css`](#css-loader)
   - [`compat`](#compat-loader)
   - [`view`](#view-loader)
   - [`set`](#set-loader)
 - [`plugins`](#plugins)
 - [`dependencies`](#included-dependencies)
   
# Configuration

## thumos.init(options)
setup a new thumos build given options:
  - `mongo` db info with auth if needed. see [mongo connection strings](http://docs.mongodb.org/manual/reference/connection-string/)
  - `buildpath` **path**: destination for the build files (should be accessible by static webserver)
  - `uglify` **boolean**: controls minification of source files (default false)
  - `pages` **array**: of objects specifying build pages:
    - `title` title for page
    - `view` **path**: of thumos view modules
    - `url` **path**: of page destination relative to website root
    - `nocopy` **bool**: (optional) if true other files in the view directory will not be copied to buildpath
  - `paths` **object**: see http://requirejs.org/docs/api.html#config-paths
  - `shim` **object**: see http://requirejs.org/docs/api.html#config-shim
  - `html` **path**: to default html template to build pages from
  - `app` **express app**: express app to build model routes on
  - `route` : base route for thumos (defaults to '/')
  - `auth` : [authentication plugin](#authentication)
  - `types` **array**: of [property types](#custom-property-types) to be initiated
  - `include` **array**: of paths to be included in build directory
  
example setup:
~~~
- app
 - main.js
 - sets
  - things.js
 - views
  - home
 - ext
  - jquery-cookie.js
 - build
~~~

main.js
~~~ javascript
var express = require('express');
var thumos = require('thumos');

var app = express();

thumos.init({
  mongo : 'myapp',
  buildpath : 'build',
  uglify : false,
	pages : [
		{
			title : 'My Thing',
			view : 'views/home',
			url : '/'
		}
	],
	shim : {
		'ext/jquery-cookie' : {
    		deps : ['jquery'],
    		exports : 'jQuery.fn.cookie'
    	}
	},
	auth : thumos.auth(),
	app : app
});
~~~

## creating views
view objects have the following properties:
  - `html`: dom to be inserted at render
  - `insert` object of `tagname : view or dom` replaces all occurances of `<#tagname>` with the specified view
  - `init(options)` **fn**: init callback. `this` contains view api
  - `fn` : object of functions. that will be appended to the view api at `view.fn.fnName` also accessible from init function

example definition:
~~~ javascript
define([
	'text!./index.html', //html dep
	'set!sets/contacts',
	'view!another_view',
	'css!./index', //css dep
], function(template, contacts, subview){  
	return {
		hmtl : template,
		insert : {
			thingy : subview.render({
				option : 'no'
			})
		}
		init : function(options){
			
		}
	};
})
~~~

## creating models
model definitions have the following properties:
 - `name` model name (url friendly)
 - `properties` : object of properties, or [validator](#property-validators). properties can simply be a model or be defined as so:
   - `valid` : [validator function](#property-validators) that calls back with validity of property
   - `type` : [property type](#custom-property-types)
   - `listed` : bool if model should be included in list
 - `functions` : object of custom functions
 
example definition:
~~~ javascript
define({
	name : 'things',
	properties : {
		name : {} //TODO
	}
})
~~~

## custom property types
property types are npm modules that likely will do a mix of client and server tasks. as a result they must be npm modules installed in your main project. they can can have commonjs dependencies, but must be written in amd format returning an object of the following format see [thumos-file](https://github.com/satchelspencer/thumos-file) for an example: 
 - `name` for reference in urls and shit idk
 - `init : function(nodeRequire, router, config, callback)` setup function (server side) passed a nodeRequire function that can require its own npm dependencies
 - `encode : function(inp, callback)` takes input, which may contain raw or decoded if data. validate and return encoded format
 - `decode : function(inp, callback)` function to take stored data and return whatever you need
 - `remove : function(inp, callback)` takes in encoded data and purges it

if you don't need a server side setup you can omit the init function and require like any other module, or inline it. **idgaf**

## creating sets
sets are a queryable, updateable collection of multiple models. they sync with the client and the server.
 - `name` set name (usually plural of model name) used in url routing
 - `path` path to be passed to express (must start with `/`) defaults to `/name`
 - `collection` mongo collection (defaults to `name`)
 - `model` model to use
 - `access` [access module](#access-module) default access controls for entire set
 - `get` query to run on startup, defaults to select all
 - `queries` object of set [queries](#queries)
 - `functions` object of custom functions that act on multiple models in a set
 
## property validators
a function with arguments `input` and `callback` takes input does some operation and calls back with error as first parameter and new value as second. example:
~~~javascript
function(name, callback){
	if(!name.match(/(.*){5,}/)) callback('name must be at least 5 chars long');
	else callback(null, name.toLowerCase());
}
~~~

## access modules
access modules are an object with four properties `read` `write` `add` `delete` each is defined by either
 - [`query`](#queries) that is passed user id. has better performance, especially on read which governs queries from mongodb
 - `function(user, callback)` uid is the user id. keep in mind code is run on server

## queries
queries are defined by function that takes an object of parameters and returns a mongodb query object example:
~~~ javascript
minAge : function(age){
	return {age : {$gt : age}}
}
~~~

## authentication 
thumos allows custom authentication mechanisms defined by the following object:
 - `init` : `function(set, callback)` setup any routes you will need, calls back with a router to be used on app
 - `verify` : `function(req, res, next)` [express](http://expressjs.com/) middleware. MUST set req.user to some unique id/access token

thumos by default sets up an email/password based authentication mechanism. cookie based sessions based on [this paper](http://www.cse.msu.edu/~alexliu/publications/Cookie/cookie.pdf). It takes the following options:
 - `set` path to userset
 - `id` name of property to store id
 - `pass` name of property to store password ([bcrypt](https://github.com/ncb000gt/node.bcrypt.js) password hash)
 - `sessionLength` number of seconds to persist session, defaults to 3600 (1hr)
 - `memcached`, defaults to 'localhost:11211'

# API

## view api
- `view.render(selecta, options)` render the view into a parent passing arbitrary options
  - `selecta` jquery selector for view to be inserted into
  - `options` object that is passed to the view's init function
- `view.$(selecta)` selects with jquery within the view
- `view.dom` jquery object of view

## set api
- `set.get(ids, callback)` retrieves models by id, calls back with [resultset](#resultset-api)
- `set.getOne(id, callback)` retrieves model by id, calls back single model
- `set.update(data, callback)` updates set, returns changed models
- `set.del(ids, callback)` removes models by id, returns list of removed ids
- `set.add(data, callback)` adds array of model data, calls back with added [resultset](#resultset-api)
- `set.find(props, callback)` returns resultset of models where properties are equal to parameter `props`
- `set.findOne(props, callback)` returns a single model
- `set.query(query, params, callback)` query a set, callback with [resultset](#resultset-api)
- `set.on(event, which, callback)` binds `callback` to `which` (array of models or ids) when [`event`](#events) is triggered
- `set.off(event, which)` turns off [`event`](#events) on models
- `set.trigger(event, which)` trigger [`event`](#events) on models
- `set.fn` object of available custom functions

## resultset api
currently it is just an array of models

## events
these events are called when certain api actions occur. your events dont have to be these
 - `change` when a model changes from its previous value
 - `add` when a new model is added to the set
 - `del` when a model is removed

# Included Loaders
requirejs loaders/plugins

## css loader
load, parse, minify and parse css/less for use in views (or whatever you're into). depends on [require-less](https://github.com/guybedford/require-less)

## compat loader
create a requirejs module with variations for client and server. requires two files `name` and `nameClient` to be required in each place

## view loader
require and build a view object

## set loader
require a set from its definition

## type loader
require a type plugin

# Included Dependencies
 - [express](http://expressjs.com/) server side routing goodness
   - [cookie-parser](https://github.com/expressjs/cookie-parser)
   - [body-parser](https://github.com/expressjs/body-parser)
 - [mongojs](https://github.com/mafintosh/mongojs) mongo api in node
 - [requirejs](http://requirejs.org/) core of loading/build
   - [requirejs-text](https://github.com/requirejs/text) load text/html
   - [require-less](https://github.com/guybedford/require-less) require css/less and build
     - [csso](https://github.com/css/csso) css optimizer/minifier
     - [less](http://lesscss.org/) less parser
   - [deasync](https://github.com/abbr/deasync) bodge-enabler for doing crazy requirejs shit
 - [jquery](https://jquery.com/) client side dom management
 - [async] (https://github.com/caolan/async) async control flow
 - [postcss](https://github.com/postcss/postcss) css processor	
 - [autoprefixer](https://github.com/postcss/autoprefixer) handles browser prefixes at build time
 - [rimraf](https://github.com/isaacs/rimraf) rm -rf
 - [cheerio](https://github.com/cheeriojs/cheerio) server side dom management
 - [node-memcached](https://github.com/3rd-Eden/memcached) memcached for node
 - [bcrypt](https://github.com/ncb000gt/node.bcrypt.js) password hash
 - [crc-32](https://github.com/SheetJS/js-crc32) crc32 checksumming for detecting when to fire `change` events

Commit message:

now only copies view subfolders if specified in the config file

readme.md, after:

# Thumos
it does some serious shit
 - [`configuration`](#configuration)
   - [`views`](#creating-views)
   - [`models`](#creating-models)
   - [`set`](#creating-sets)
   - [`access`](#access-modules)
   - [`queries`](#queries)
   - [`authentication`](#authentication)
 - [`api`](#api)
   - [`views`](#view-api)
   - [`models`](#model-api)
   - [`sets`](#set-api)
 - [`loaders`](#included-loaders)
   - [`css`](#css-loader)
   - [`compat`](#compat-loader)
   - [`view`](#view-loader)
   - [`set`](#set-loader)
 - [`plugins`](#plugins)
 - [`dependencies`](#included-dependencies)
   
# Configuration

## thumos.init(options)
setup a new thumos build given options:
  - `mongo` db info with auth if needed. see [mongo connection strings](http://docs.mongodb.org/manual/reference/connection-string/)
  - `buildpath` **path**: destination for the build files (should be accessible by static webserver)
  - `uglify` **boolean**: controls minification of source files (default false)
  - `pages` **array**: of objects specifying build pages:
    - `title` title for page
    - `view` **path**: of thumos view modules
    - `url` **path**: of page destination relative to website root
    - `nocopy` **bool**: (optional) if true other files in the view directory will not be copied to buildpath
  - `paths` **object**: see http://requirejs.org/docs/api.html#config-paths
  - `shim` **object**: see http://requirejs.org/docs/api.html#config-shim
  - `html` **path**: to default html template to build pages from
  - `app` **express app**: express app to build model routes on
  - `route` : base route for thumos (defaults to '/')
  - `auth` : [authentication plugin](#authentication)
  - `types` **array**: of [property types](#custom-property-types) to be initiated
  - `include` **array**: of paths to be included in build directory
  
example setup:
~~~
- app
 - main.js
 - sets
  - things.js
 - views
  - home
 - ext
  - jquery-cookie.js
 - build
~~~

main.js
~~~ javascript
var express = require('express');
var thumos = require('thumos');

var app = express();

thumos.init({
  mongo : 'myapp',
  buildpath : 'build',
  uglify : false,
	pages : [
		{
			title : 'My Thing',
			view : 'views/home',
			url : '/'
		}
	],
	shim : {
		'ext/jquery-cookie' : {
    		deps : ['jquery'],
    		exports : 'jQuery.fn.cookie'
    	}
	},
	auth : thumos.auth(),
	app : app
});
~~~

## creating views
view objects have the following properties:
  - `html`: dom to be inserted at render
  - `insert` object of `tagname : view or dom` replaces all occurances of `<#tagname>` with the specified view
  - `init(options)` **fn**: init callback. `this` contains view api
  - `fn` : object of functions. that will be appended to the view api at `view.fn.fnName` also accessible from init function

example definition:
~~~ javascript
define([
	'text!./index.html', //html dep
	'set!sets/contacts',
	'view!another_view',
	'css!./index', //css dep
], function(template, contacts, subview){  
	return {
		hmtl : template,
		insert : {
			thingy : subview.render({
				option : 'no'
			})
		}
		init : function(options){
			
		}
	};
})
~~~

you may also include a `config.json` in the view directory with the following options:
 - `include` array of paths (inside the view directory) to be copied to the build directory

## creating models
model definitions have the following properties:
 - `name` model name (url friendly)
 - `properties` : object of properties, or [validator](#property-validators). properties can simply be a model or be defined as so:
   - `valid` : [validator function](#property-validators) that calls back with validity of property
   - `type` : [property type](#custom-property-types)
   - `listed` : bool if model should be included in list
 - `functions` : object of custom functions
 
example definition:
~~~ javascript
define({
	name : 'things',
	properties : {
		name : {} //TODO
	}
})
~~~

## custom property types
property types are npm modules that likely will do a mix of client and server tasks. as a result they must be npm modules installed in your main project. they can can have commonjs dependencies, but must be written in amd format returning an object of the following format see [thumos-file](https://github.com/satchelspencer/thumos-file) for an example: 
 - `name` for reference in urls and shit idk
 - `init : function(nodeRequire, router, config, callback)` setup function (server side) passed a nodeRequire function that can require its own npm dependencies
 - `encode : function(inp, callback)` takes input, which may contain raw or decoded if data. validate and return encoded format
 - `decode : function(inp, callback)` function to take stored data and return whatever you need
 - `remove : function(inp, callback)` takes in encoded data and purges it

if you don't need a server side setup you can omit the init function and require like any other module, or inline it. **idgaf**

## creating sets
sets are a queryable, updateable collection of multiple models. they sync with the client and the server.
 - `name` set name (usually plural of model name) used in url routing
 - `path` path to be passed to express (must start with `/`) defaults to `/name`
 - `collection` mongo collection (defaults to `name`)
 - `model` model to use
 - `access` [access module](#access-module) default access controls for entire set
 - `get` query to run on startup, defaults to select all
 - `queries` object of set [queries](#queries)
 - `functions` object of custom functions that act on multiple models in a set
 
## property validators
a function with arguments `input` and `callback` takes input does some operation and calls back with error as first parameter and new value as second. example:
~~~javascript
function(name, callback){
	if(!name.match(/(.*){5,}/)) callback('name must be at least 5 chars long');
	else callback(null, name.toLowerCase());
}
~~~

## access modules
access modules are an object with four properties `read` `write` `add` `delete` each is defined by either
 - [`query`](#queries) that is passed user id. has better performance, especially on read which governs queries from mongodb
 - `function(user, callback)` uid is the user id. keep in mind code is run on server

## queries
queries are defined by function that takes an object of parameters and returns a mongodb query object example:
~~~ javascript
minAge : function(age){
	return {age : {$gt : age}}
}
~~~

## authentication 
thumos allows custom authentication mechanisms defined by the following object:
 - `init` : `function(set, callback)` setup any routes you will need, calls back with a router to be used on app
 - `verify` : `function(req, res, next)` [express](http://expressjs.com/) middleware. MUST set req.user to some unique id/access token

thumos by default sets up an email/password based authentication mechanism. cookie based sessions based on [this paper](http://www.cse.msu.edu/~alexliu/publications/Cookie/cookie.pdf). It takes the following options:
 - `set` path to userset
 - `id` name of property to store id
 - `pass` name of property to store password ([bcrypt](https://github.com/ncb000gt/node.bcrypt.js) password hash)
 - `sessionLength` number of seconds to persist session, defaults to 3600 (1hr)
 - `memcached`, defaults to 'localhost:11211'

# API

## view api
- `view.render(selecta, options)` render the view into a parent passing arbitrary options
  - `selecta` jquery selector for view to be inserted into
  - `options` object that is passed to the view's init function
- `view.$(selecta)` selects with jquery within the view
- `view.dom` jquery object of view

## set api
- `set.get(ids, callback)` retrieves models by id, calls back with [resultset](#resultset-api)
- `set.getOne(id, callback)` retrieves model by id, calls back single model
- `set.update(data, callback)` updates set, returns changed models
- `set.del(ids, callback)` removes models by id, returns list of removed ids
- `set.add(data, callback)` adds array of model data, calls back with added [resultset](#resultset-api)
- `set.find(props, callback)` returns resultset of models where properties are equal to parameter `props`
- `set.findOne(props, callback)` returns a single model
- `set.query(query, params, callback)` query a set, callback with [resultset](#resultset-api)
- `set.on(event, which, callback)` binds `callback` to `which` (array of models or ids) when [`event`](#events) is triggered
- `set.off(event, which)` turns off [`event`](#events) on models
- `set.trigger(event, which)` trigger [`event`](#events) on models
- `set.fn` object of available custom functions

## resultset api
currently it is just an array of models

## events
these events are called when certain api actions occur. your events dont have to be these
 - `change` when a model changes from its previous value
 - `add` when a new model is added to the set
 - `del` when a model is removed

# Included Loaders
requirejs loaders/plugins

## css loader
load, parse, minify and parse css/less for use in views (or whatever you're into). depends on [require-less](https://github.com/guybedford/require-less)

## compat loader
create a requirejs module with variations for client and server. requires two files `name` and `nameClient` to be required in each place

## view loader
require and build a view object

## set loader
require a set from its definition

## type loader
require a type plugin

# Included Dependencies
 - [express](http://expressjs.com/) server side routing goodness
   - [cookie-parser](https://github.com/expressjs/cookie-parser)
   - [body-parser](https://github.com/expressjs/body-parser)
 - [mongojs](https://github.com/mafintosh/mongojs) mongo api in node
 - [requirejs](http://requirejs.org/) core of loading/build
   - [requirejs-text](https://github.com/requirejs/text) load text/html
   - [require-less](https://github.com/guybedford/require-less) require css/less and build
     - [csso](https://github.com/css/csso) css optimizer/minifier
     - [less](http://lesscss.org/) less parser
   - [deasync](https://github.com/abbr/deasync) bodge-enabler for doing crazy requirejs shit
 - [jquery](https://jquery.com/) client side dom management
 - [async] (https://github.com/caolan/async) async control flow
 - [postcss](https://github.com/postcss/postcss) css processor	
 - [autoprefixer](https://github.com/postcss/autoprefixer) handles browser prefixes at build time
 - [rimraf](https://github.com/isaacs/rimraf) rm -rf
 - [cheerio](https://github.com/cheeriojs/cheerio) server side dom management
 - [node-memcached](https://github.com/3rd-Eden/memcached) memcached for node
 - [bcrypt](https://github.com/ncb000gt/node.bcrypt.js) password hash
 - [crc-32](https://github.com/SheetJS/js-crc32) crc32 checksumming for detecting when to fire `change` events
